---
title: "Production farms, class-1 integrons, and antibiotic resistance in E. coli isolates from rural Ecuadorean chickens and humans"
collection: talks
type: "Oral Communication"
permalink: /talks/talk-1
venue: "65th Annual Meeting, American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene"
date: 2016-11-14
location: "Atlanta, GA"
---
Scientific Session 43: One Health- Interface of Human Health/Animal Diseases

While it is clear that industrial-scale farming operations affect antibiotic resistance (AbR) in livestock and humans, the extent to which smaller community-level farming operations impact AbR in surrounding communities, particularly in developing nations, is poorly described. We hypothesized that small-scale production operations contribute to elevated levels of AbR bacterial isolates in livestock and people living in close proximity to these operations by selecting for genetic mobile elements such as integrons that allow sharing of resistant gene cassettes between isolates. To investigate the relationship between community-level farming, mobile elements, and AbR, we conducted a serial cross-sectional community-based study collecting E. coli fecal isolates from over 1,000 chickens and humans in rural villages from northern Ecuador. Isolates were typed for 4 mobile elements using a DNA microarray platform; phenotypic resistance was assessed for 12 antibiotics using standard disc diffusion assays. We compared AbR levels in isolates from production chickens (broiler and laying hens raised for sale and fed commercial feed containing antibiotics) to AbR among isolates from household chickens (raised for domestic use and fed antibiotic-free feed). AbR for all markers was higher in production chickens compared to household chickens. There was a significant downward trend in AbR levels across birds from production operations, household birds in villages with production operations, and household birds in villages with no production operations, suggesting that proximity to a production operation can influence AbR in non-production chickens. In addition, the risk of phenotypic AbR appears to be modified by the presence or absence of class-1 integrons, suggesting a complex relationship between the environment, integrons, and AbR. These analyses (which will be expanded to include humans in houses associated with production or household chickens) suggest that small-scale production poultry farming selects for class-1 integrons in both chicken types, which has important public health implications.
